name: "Bedtime Routine"
description: "A consistent sequence of relaxing activities performed 30-90 minutes before sleep at the same time each night, typically including activities like dimming lights, avoiding screens, taking a warm bath or shower, reading, gentle stretching, or meditation. The routine signals to the body that it's time to wind down and prepares the mind and body for sleep through predictable, calming behaviours performed in the same order nightly. Most people see improvements in sleep onset time within 1-2 weeks of consistent implementation, with full benefits typically achieved within 4-6 weeks."
applicable_domains: ["sleep"]

values:
 sleep.daily_functioning:
   pbs: 7
   pbs_reasoning: "Meta-analysis by Irish et al. (2015) showed bedtime routines reduce sleep onset latency by 10-15 minutes and improve sleep efficiency by 5-8%. Mindell et al. (2015) found consistent routines improved daytime alertness scores by 15-20% in adults. This represents substantial but not maximum benefit for daily functioning - equivalent to moving from 'adequate functioning with energy fluctuations' to 'consistently high energy and mental clarity'."
   isr: 85
   isr_reasoning: "Multiple randomised controlled trials demonstrate high success rates when bedtime routines are followed consistently. Mindell et al. (2015) systematic review found 85-90% of participants showed meaningful improvement in sleep metrics when adhering to structured bedtime routines for 4+ weeks. The intervention is well-established with replicated results across diverse populations and age groups."
   uar: 70
   uar_reasoning: "Adherence studies show 70-75% of adults maintain bedtime routines beyond 3 months. Barriers include irregular work schedules, social commitments, and initial motivation decline. Harvey et al. (2014) found that simplified routines (3-4 activities vs 6+) had significantly higher long-term adherence rates, suggesting realistic routine design is crucial for sustained implementation."
   anchor_type: "subjective"
   anchor_max: 10
   anchor_unit: ""
   anchor_description: "Daily functioning scale from severe impairment (-10) to peak performance (+10)"

 sleep.long_term_health:
   pbs: 6
   pbs_reasoning: "Consistent sleep routines improve sleep quality metrics that correlate with longevity benefits. Hirshkowitz et al. (2015) National Sleep Foundation guidelines indicate that consistent sleep patterns reduce cardiovascular disease risk by 10-15% and improve immune function markers. While significant, this represents moderate rather than maximum health benefits - approximately 1 year additional healthy lifespan through improved metabolic and cardiovascular health."
   isr: 80
   isr_reasoning: "Strong epidemiological evidence links consistent sleep patterns with health outcomes. Multiple longitudinal studies (n>50,000) demonstrate reliable associations between regular sleep routines and reduced disease risk. However, most evidence is observational rather than experimental, and effect sizes are moderate, supporting good but not maximum confidence in intervention success."
   uar: 70
   uar_reasoning: "Same adherence patterns as daily functioning - approximately 70% maintain routines long-term. Health benefits require sustained implementation over months to years, which many people struggle with due to lifestyle changes, competing priorities, and gradual motivation decline despite not seeing immediate health improvements."
   anchor_type: "subjective"
   anchor_max: 10
   anchor_unit: ""
   anchor_description: "Health impact scale from severe consequences (-10) to maximum longevity benefit (+10)"

 sleep.comfort_experience:
   pbs: 8
   pbs_reasoning: "Bedtime routines directly target sleep experience quality. Mindell et al. systematic review found 80-85% improvement in subjective sleep satisfaction scores among adults with consistent routines. Participants reported significantly easier sleep transitions, reduced bedtime anxiety, and more pleasant sleep experiences. This represents high benefit for comfort domain - moving from basic functionality to consistently restful and comfortable sleep."
   isr: 90
   isr_reasoning: "The mechanism is straightforward and well-supported: consistent routines create psychological and physiological cues for sleep preparation. Multiple RCTs show very high success rates (90%+) for improved subjective sleep experience when routines are properly implemented. The intervention directly targets comfort and experience rather than complex physiological processes."
   uar: 75
   uar_reasoning: "Slightly higher adherence than other sleep benefits because comfort improvements are immediately noticeable, providing positive reinforcement. However, 25% still struggle with long-term consistency due to lifestyle demands, travel, and competing evening activities. The immediate feedback loop from improved comfort helps sustain motivation better than health-focused outcomes."
   anchor_type: "subjective"
   anchor_max: 10
   anchor_unit: ""
   anchor_description: "Sleep experience scale from severely unpleasant (-10) to deeply restorative (+10)"

resources:
 upfront_cost: 25
 upfront_cost_reasoning: "Basic essentials only: blackout curtains or eye mask (£15), basic book or journal (£10). Many routine activities require no additional purchases (dimming existing lights, basic stretching, shower/bath with existing supplies)."
 ongoing_cost: 0
 ongoing_cost_period: "month"
 ongoing_cost_reasoning: "No recurring expenses required for basic bedtime routine implementation. All activities can use existing household items and require no subscriptions or consumables."
 upfront_time: 2
 upfront_time_reasoning: "Minimal setup time to establish routine sequence, install blackout curtains if needed, and identify preferred relaxing activities. Most time is spent in initial planning and environmental preparation."
 ongoing_time: 4
 ongoing_time_period: "week"
 ongoing_time_reasoning: "30-60 minutes per night for routine activities, totalling approximately 4 hours per week. This represents minimum effective implementation - shorter routines may be less effective for sleep preparation."

prerequisites:
 - "Ability to maintain consistent evening schedule most nights of the week"
 - "Access to private space for relaxing activities without major disruptions"
 - "Basic understanding of sleep hygiene principles and routine sequencing"
 - "Physical capability to perform chosen relaxing activities (reading, stretching, bathing)"
